# Streams

Galore uses stream abstraction which provides access to both real-time and histroical data, whereas, many time series databases and systems have  strict data separation methods for real-time and historical data as well as they have different abstraction methods for accessing real-time and historical data. 

A stream can be compared to a pipe with continuous flow of some medium often a fluid. The streams do not have a continuous flow of  a course medium, rather have discrete items called events. 

Events have different types related to which type of stream they belong to. But all events have a UTC timestamp set as close to the origin of the event as possible.


The following are the Galore Streams properties:

  - They are strictly ordered by timestamp (this can be  violated by some aggregate stream types)

  - Event timestamps are unique for most of the stream types (this can be  violated by some stream types)

  - They are strongly typed

  - They can contain history, but some are real-time only

When data is ingested into Galore, the individual events are dispatched to their respective streams depending on their source identifier, either an **external id** to identify the sensor or device producing the measurement or event, or a galore specific stream id or path in the asset model.

This streams are often called the "raw data" streams. Each raw data stream is associated with a set of metadata describing the stream. The raw data stream is always associated with a single node in the asset model.

There are three types of raw data streams:

- Vector event streams- 
The events in a vector stream is a timestamp and a vector (array) of floating point values. The vector can have one or more elements. The vector usually represent a measurement or a calculated value. The metadata contains a description for each element with fields such as display-name and engineering unit.

- State event stream- The state event stream is intended for recording state transition event from a state machine. It has fields for the current and previous state, the timestamp for the last 2 transition and attributes (key, value lists). Typically it is used for external alarm and events, and alarm and events generated by the calculator service. The two timestamp fields makes it very easy to visualize states as waterfall or timeline diagrams. The stream and its events has a type field which allows it to be associated with its state descriptors.

- Sample set event streams- The events in a sampleset stream contains a table like data structure where each column is called a channel. They are often used to represent data that are sampled on a to high frequency for use with a vector stream. They are also very useful to represent lookup tables, calibration curves, reference curves and forecasts that are periodically reproduced.

From the raw data stream Galore creates a set of different aggregate streams. The type of aggregate produced is different for each stream type:

- Vector pre aggregates- An aggregate stream is produced for a set of predefined time intervals. The events in these streams are still vector put for each element in the raw vector there are three elements in the aggregate vector with the average, min and max value for the interval respectively. The last element of the aggregate vector is a count of the number of events that was aggregated for the interval.

- State event pre aggregates- An aggregate stream is produced for a set of predefined time intervals. The events in these streams is a special state aggregate type with a count of the number of times a state has been visited and the total duration spent in that time during the aggregate interval. Propagated state events streams are also aggregated in this way (see next item). 
> Note: At the time of writing these aggregate streams does not have a real time.

- Propagated state events streams- These streams are associated with all nodes in the asset model. A merged stream of all the event streams considered related to this node, usually by being a descendant node in the asset model. Multiple propagated streams can be associated with each node if there are different type of state streams related to the node. Typical use of this feature is e.g. to find all alarms events on and asset or to find alarms caused by monitoring other streams.

- Sample set pre aggregate streams- These streams counts the number of sample set events in each pre aggregate interval.


